It's time to innovate
where no one is innovating:
in the political system.
Because our democracy
is terribly stalemated
and is no longer able to answer
the demands of a society
that is becoming more and more complex
and is being transformed
by new technologies.
Working in politics is not easy.
In fact, I gave my first steps
in the world of civil society.
But I think we need
a better distribution of power,
to share knowledge
and create spaces for dialogue
so that we can produce
better solutions with more consensus.
Politics is the best tool
that we have to do it.
So, a couple of years ago,
I decided to take a leap of faith;
I began working on a political campaign
in the province of Buenos Aires.
And I didn't like at all what I saw.
First of all, no one was discussing ideas.
They were only discussing people.
I remember that on one occasion
I saw how they used Photoshop
to erase a mustache and whiten the teeth
of a candidate
because he had to look younger.
It didn't matter if his ideas
were from the past century.
Pretending was all that mattered.
I was in a city warehouse once,
in Greater Buenos Aires,
and it was fully stocked with sheets,
mattresses, and building materials
they had never delivered.
When I asked what the materials
were doing there,
and why they didn't deliver them,
they answered me lightly:
"Don't you realize? We're storing them
for next year, for the elections."
Of course.
That year there were no elections.
People weren't voting; did it matter
they had no roof over their heads
or a place to sleep?
That year they weren't being consulted.
And that's the problem.
We live in a political system
that responds
to a 400-year-old information technology:
the printing press.
When the ones who were considered citizens
could no longer participate
in the decision-making spaces
nor have access to the information
needed to make those decisions,
then a system based
on intermediaries was designed.
Those representatives were intermediaries
between citizens and those spaces
where the decisions
that impacted their lives were made.
And that's the same democracy
we have nowadays.
But society has changed. Look at this.
This is the papal inauguration ceremony
back in 2005 and the same picture in 2013.
Today, if we want to know
about any subject,
we've just got to go to Wikipedia
or we can even search
for a TED talk about it.
Who hasn't been informed
first by a Twitter user
about some event
in any place around the world
rather than by the traditional media?
Who hasn't posted,
or seen posted, something like:
"I'm looking for a partner,"
"This is my CV,"
"I need to rent an apartment"?
Today, it's more likely
to get a job through Linkedln
than through an agency,
and an apartment through Facebook
than through a real estate broker.
Not to mention
how connectivity transformed
the culture and entertainment industry.
Even our perception
of property is changing.
Do we want to have the actual CD
or to listen to the music?
Do we want to have the DVD
stored on a bookshelf
or to watch the movie?
The Internet dramatically lowers
the barriers of access to information
and makes us both producers
and consumers of information.
The Internet sets us up
on a peer-to-peer network
with no intermediaries,
and we can all participate
in the large virtual global conversation.
The Internet turned
that few-to-many conversation
into a many-to-many conversation,
it democratized it.
And we are seeing that in every field:
in culture, in education,
in work organization, socially,
and even in the economy.
But what about politics?
The political system insists
on excluding us
from the decision-making spaces.
And the consequence, worldwide, is this.
It's a clash between a system
that doesn't represent anymore
and has no capacity for dialogue
and a lot of citizens
that are getting increasingly used to
representing themselves,
without intermediaries.
Look. Occupy Wall Street,
the Spanish indignados,
the Chilean students,
the Arab Spring,
they are all examples
of this global representation crisis.
I saw all this steam
that our political system's valve
can't contain
and I couldn't help asking myself:
how are we going to go
from agitation to construction?
Because it seems that we can use
social networks, at a very low cost,
to organize massive demonstrations.
But what's not debated is
what we want to do afterwards.
What institutions do we want
to build for this new network society?
So, if the Internet
is the new printing press,
the question we have to ask ourselves is:
Which is the democracy
of the Internet era?
Together with a group of people
we started, here, in Argentina,
a foundation called "Democracia en Red",
that aims at thinking
how we can transform all this noise
into a signal with a direct influence
on the system.
And we started to see many examples
all around the world
and decided to create
a new way of citizen participation
and social thinking
for the local legislatures.
We asked ourselves how we could make
the most of this new technology
to make our representatives represent us.
There are two reasons
why we chose this path.
The first one is that we believe
participation costs are too high.
If participating in politics means
to be an active member
of a political party since college
so that some day, we might have our seat
at the table of some political party
that takes some decision;
if participating in politics means
to put a table in a corner,
collect 4,000 signatures, propose a bill,
and then wait for our legislators
to look at it;
if participating in politics
means having to be a lawyer
to understand what the laws
that regulate our lives are about,
well, then clearly only a few
will want to participate.
But, what if we make it easier
for the citizen?
What if we can create a space
where even those who have
only one free hour a week,
but care about their city
and have something to say, can do so?
The second reason why we chose this path
is because we believe
that we make better decisions
when we listen
to as many voices as possible.
Then why do we think that a legislator,
working alone will be better able
to bring together
all the aspects involved in the drafting
and implementation of a law
than if he works with those
directly affected by that law?
Now, how can we put 100,000 ideas
in a single legislative seat?
How can a legislator incarnate
all those different points of view?
Well, once again, let's use
technology to explore that path.
So, the system we designed
has two components.
It's called Democracy OS
with an online and an offline component.
The online component is a social network
for democratic participation.
It's a platform that will allow us
to stay informed, debate, and decide
how we want our legislators to vote.
Informing ourselves is key.
Now I'm going to read a -
well, a law, it's not a bill but a law -
"Remove from the future
urban zoning district UF
of the urban planning code, fractions C
and H of block 75A section 92,
subdivision 1 and affect it
to district U, urbaniza..."
Well, you get what I mean.
This is not a joke.
This is the way things are.
What this means is that they'll change
the zoning of two blocks
in order to build high-rises.
Oh, well, that's something else.
If we knew that they're planning to build
a high-rise at the corner,
wouldn't we have
something to say about it?
I don't know, we might be OK with it.
Or we might not.
But if we don't get informed,
if we don't know, then we'll never
be able to have a say in it.
So, the first thing we're going to do
is to list every bill
that is being currently discussed,
and we're going to explain them
so that everyone can understand.
And now, once we've found things out,
we are informed and have an opinion,
what happens today with those opinions?
They end up in a coffee conversation
or find their way in the comments section
of an online newspaper?
But, what if we can create a space
that gathers all those opinions together?
Somewhere where they can be discussed,
where all those ideas end up in bills
that really represent our community.
Where, if you feel comfortable
on a certain topic, you can vote,
but if you don't,
you can delegate your vote
to another person in whom you trust,
but only on that specific topic,
not for two whole years.
Wouldn't you be interested
in participating in a space like that?
Today, what options
does the system offer us to participate?
A public hearing, on a Tuesday at 11am
in the city's downtown area.
Which of you could make it to downtown
at eleven in the morning on a Tuesday
to give an opinion?
Why do we have to be physically present
to participate in these spaces?
And that is our only option.
Nowadays, we can take an online course
from a university
we'll never see in our lifetime,
we can finance ourselves
through micro-donations
from people all around the world,
we network with people
we'll probably never meet,
but we can't tell our legislator
whether we want to fence off
our local park or not?
Well, it doesn't make much sense, right?
And here is when this key
offline component comes in:
the political parties.
And, why is it key?
Because in Argentina,
the monopoly of representation
is held by political parties.
The only way
for this collective intelligence
to have a direct impact on the system
is through political parties
that run for elections, win seats,
and commit themselves to vote
according to whatever is decided
on the platform.
Imagine a legislator
who goes to the committee meetings
and films them for everyone to watch.
Or imagine a legislator
talking with the citizens
in an online forum every Sunday.
It's not impossible.
It isn't sending a mission
to the Moon, the tools are there.
So, the platform we've created
is free and open source
because what we need are political parties
who dare change the old way
of decision making,
stop doing it behind citizens' backs
and start doing it
together with those directly affected
by those decisions, us.
Imagine all we could do
if we dared to innovate
where no one has innovated yet:
in the political system.
Imagine all we could achieve.
Marshall McLuhan says
that politics is about
solving today's problems
with yesterday's tools.
Well, it's time to solve
today's problems with today's tools.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Thank you.